The core unit of workbooks is a workbook. Now, if you looked at a workbook, you would, at first glance, see an HTML file, the same core unit that exists everywhere across the internet. HTML is not only capable of, uh, of rendering and showing on any device to any user, the same interface across every browser, and foundationally, has done so for decades, generations. Within an HTML file, you'll see a lot of the same, um, components. You'll see... Or within a workbook, you'll see a lot of the same components. You'll see, um, CSS, which is the standard for, uh, speaking the lang- the objective language of design. Now, in the modern age of the web, we use code to make videos. We use code to, uh, create songs. We use code to, um, write books and tell stories and share brand, create brands and ideas. And all of those have a... And all of those need to be written with design in mind. So, CSS has become that language, not only for code, but for the many things that code touches.

Within the HTML file you'll also find JavaScript, which of course, JavaScript is a comprehensive language capable of doing many things, including animation, um, computation, and, um, flexibly being able to, uh, I don't know, something about something. I don't know. Uh, you'll also find WebAssembly. WebAssembly is something you might not have heard about or you know about, but have never written, because W- WebAssembly is assembly level code. You probably have never written WebAssembly. Uh, you've probably compiled something to WebAssembly, 'cause you write one language and WebAssembly is capable of being compiled from many other languages that are essentially C-level languages to some extent. The core... WebAssembly allows you to, allows an HTML file to not only be a truly polyglot file, because it can now render and run computation at a assembly level language like C or Rust or Go or Python. It's able to do so because,

eh, do so in an isolated environment, because it was written for the browser. The browser inherently is one of the most secure and isolated applications you have today. And WebAssembly has been a foundational part of making that even more secure while being able to deliver high level computational code to those HTML files you see every day. And I'm gonna get back to that isolation later. A workbook is also, if you were to look at it at first glance, natively zipped. It uses a program called GZip that allows us to compress the content of a, um, workbook file, while still revealing the core structures within it. Oh, the other thing that you'd find in a workbook file is a SQLite binary file. Uh, SQLite, SQLite is one of the most efficient database and query languages, uh, or query systems frameworks today. And SQLite is also capable of being shipped simply as a single binary file. You're also able to store and share binary files within SQLite, including images, videos, any

other data.SQLite serves the integral purpose in our environment of not only being an extensible SQL database that is standardized across all workbooks, but as a shippable virtual file system for any person or agent to be able to work with. In today's day and age of agents, having a virtual file system has become the new norm, to the extent that agents have become even less reliant on things such as vector databases and... Even though you can store that in the SQLite, uh, databases in a workbook. Um, those agents use those for their memory for storing context. So, with the combination of WebAssembly, it can run low level processes, Assembly-level processes, and SQLite both together and emulate pretty much any,

um, any operating system process at a computationally, um, comparable performance. Uh, within an isolated environment, that being the, that being WebAssembly. (paper rustles) This means that an agent could effectively run inside of an HTML file and have a virtual file store and operating system level processes, like batch emulation with WebAssembly, to essentially isolate it, uh, and run it at the edge of an HTML file or within a single HTML file. That said, HTML in itself

does not maintain or they are not usually self-editing unless they are in a browser. Or I mean, they're usually not self-editing in a browser, which is why nobody really bothers to build these kind of things. That said, now with agents, we find ourselves renting micro virtual machines, like Firecracker VM or something, or E2B or Daytona, or renting whole server farms. Hell, people are buying Mac minis just to run an agent, which to me makes absolutely no sense, uh, and is a complete waste of hardware. Some people are even running agents in serverless functions, which albeit has its purpose, especially, uh, for certain specific use cases. But to be honest, nothing about an agent or agentic tasks are ephemeral like a serverless function. We usually run agents, especially today, with the idea of memory and persistence, autonomy, chronology, which all negate the idea of even being run at the edge, like a serverless function. Especially now that we have file system stores, uh, reading and writing, yet we're sh- we're further and further separating the things that need them from the files themselves. I don't know if that works, but that's, that's something to just consider. Um,

so if... That brings me to the second prong of what workbooks is, which is...The ecosystem, and this is an ecosystem, it's not just... Not just an HTML file. That's, that's, that's just the core unit of what Workbooks is, plural. The main component to stand on is the runtime, the Workbooks runtime, which is written entirely, almost entirely in Elixir. (sniffs) Um, Elixir, if you don't know, is a, is w- is a, um, highly concurrent, efficient language written in... Uh, uh, uh, with the beam VM, which is a Erlang implementation. Erlang being one of the more foundational languages that was used for telecoms companies to manage and, um, serve for thousands or millions of telephone customers across the wire, being able to, uh, you know, manage all of those phone calls on switchboards for switchboard operators in, like, the 1980s or whatever. But Elixir is a modern predecessor that is

essentially taking that same technology that was invented so long ago by, uh, Ericsson, uh, to reinvent it for the internet age, which means now, with Elixir, many of the largest companies that scale are building their servers with Elixir because it means they, they can run less computation, meaning less computers, uh, in the cloud, but serve more customers. Now, Elixir does have its caveats. It is a somewhat, um... It is nowhere near the computational power of something like, uh, Rust or C++ or C or, um, Zig. Those are far more efficient languages. But it is one of the more ergonomically, um, lovable languages in the space, meaning people like to write in it, because it's very nice to write in it, um, as well as the ability for these concurrent functions means that I can host a single server somewhere and be able to run concurrent calls from that single server. Um, instead of running, you know, going to Vercel or Cloudflare and having a bunch of serverless functions

run my entire business, and when it scales, I get wrecked with the bill, I can instead slowly scale by increasing compute, which companies like DigitalOcean or Fly.io have effectively done for us. They allow us to buy a, quote-unquote, machine, whether literal or figurative. In Fly.io's case, they do some abstractions with VMs to get you that virtual machine. And in the case of DigitalOcean, you're literally buying the compute. Um, you're literally buying the, um, the hardware, or renting the hardware. Um, so what that means is, instead of, like I said, uh, running thousands of, um, uh, uh, serverless functions at scale and then paying the price as you get through a certain threshold or you make it to a certain level, you can instead scale, like I said, by slowly growing the memory and hardware that can run 1,000X more, um, they can, they can run just as many calls. So now instead of paying possibly hundreds or thousands or hundreds of thousands of dollars at scale, I can very slowly manage my cost, and that's what large companies love to do. And the little guy is very interested in Serverless because it's safe and it's good and it's easy, and usually it's cost-effective for very small things. That said,

um, when you run agents, it usually means, this is where the money is today, running micro VMs.Now, micro VMs are things like E2B or Daytona, which I do love those systems. I've also equally spent a lot of money developing on those systems to find out that, realistically, I don't wanna use them at scale. I can only imagine what the bills will be like and buying into that system seems like a trap. Albeit, I don't know anything, but it- it's, uh, you pay a lot more for the security of your own Linux sandbox, where the agent can run safely, run untrusted code, and write and read and work. Um, which the micro VM is basically the same thing as the, uh, serverless function, um, in the same sense. Now, the runtime works explicitly with workbooks, because workbooks, while it is a artifact that can be delivered, it is also a micro VM or a container. Now, how does that work? Well, when you think about what a micro VM is, it's a, usually a Docker image, meaning you have a set of procedures that formulate a static file. You usually have to write those, um, for, uh, a Linux kernel, meaning, like, it's usually running in Linux, so it's not the same across any platform. You- If you want to run

that on Mac or on Windows, it's gonna be a different, uh, beast, and you have to, you know, rewrite Docker for those. You have to download Docker Desktop. If you've done- gone that route and you're next, p- you probably think that's not a big deal. If you're new to development or you're kind of this, um, you know, you're stretched thin, it's gonna be a lot more... I've had, I've had a lot more headaches dealing with Docker images trying to launch and replicate Linux sandboxes than I have just dealing with HTML files. But what makes an HTML file or workbook a container is that we have essentially aggregated, I've aggregated and I've also written code that allows us to compile the... Well, okay, so first off, what makes a sandbox unsafe? A sandbox is unsafe because... Well, what- what makes, what makes, uh, an agent environment today unsafe? If I'm running Claude code on my computer and I give it access to everything, and it can run Bash, which is an operating system, uh, level process, it could basically delete anything it wants to. It can have access to anything it wants to. Having access to an operating system means that you are limiting the security of things, like key chain, like, uh, um, uh, you know, pass, passkeys or, um, environment variables, uh, things like API keys to other systems or, um, personal information. There's a lot less control that you can do, because

with operating system level access, it is sort of an open box of where it finds a vulnerability to be able to do something, and long-term, that's not usually a good thing. For the common man, I don't think you have really any issues with that, but if you are serving two clients or enterprise clients, there's a huge risk factor. So, that means you need security of a sandbox. A sandbox is an isolated environment that you can trust to essentially run untrusted code. So, if I wanted to have an agent, uh, build an app, build a website based on my company data, proprietary data about our users, if I put it in a sandbox with all of that data, just drop the whole data in there and then I start the sandbox up and say, "Hey, agent, go," it technically has unfettered access. Now, that's not necessarily a bad thing depending on the output. The LM doesn't remember. There's no state storage. But all of a sudden, if you allow that agent to have internet access, now it has a way to leak that data out. You give it a GitHub repo, it has a way to possibly publish information that should be private. There are risks of prompt inj- prompt injection where a foreign actor

is able to prompt inject your agent somehow with external data and force it to do something or send something to a REST API that has, um, you know, post to a REST API. And then all of a sudden you have, uh, that data leaked out to...Um, an adversary or a competitor. So, by nature, this requires a level of isolation, which is why micro VMs has become so popular. I don't have to really think about anything other than, what do I want to give the agent? What capabilities and things do I need to stop it from doing? Uh, what does it need to do, what does it not need to do? What can I externally store on another server or within our database and, uh, keep out of the operating system while allowing it access, uh, based on certain rules and validations that I can store or manage or limit certain data that it might need to compute but not see? That becomes extremely valuable. Um, there's also notions of the great firewall, meaning a lot of companies work with teams in China. Because they work with teams in China, there are strict rules about how data and data sovereignty can be maintained while sharing to China. So, that also means that the same rules that teams have for agents often have for offshore teams. How do we manage that? And the same, same rules apply. You know, and then if you have multiple team members shipping code,

who's to know that one of them isn't a corporate e- corporate, corporate spy? Those exist every day. I mean, uh, you'd be surprised. The FBI said there's, like, whatever the statistic is, it's, like, happens every, every two hours, uh, or five hours or something, um, Chinese-based corporate espionage. Um, because of that, it means that... Not only does creating the right system protect you from, you know, data leakage or security, you, you have all these threats everywhere. So all of a sudden, having any kind of, um, system, you, you can't, you can't sacrifice that level of isolation at any point at scale. But I might personally be working at a company where I don't really understand that, or especially as today's bot coding, I need to work with agents in a way that is easy enough for me to understand, but scalable enough to my team, my organization. And when they have their, um, you know, uh, uh, security, uh, reviews of these tools and systems, they're gonna have a lot of questions if you start using all these micro-services, if you start leveraging, um, systems you don't understand, uh, if you start sharing, um, or working with more and more proprietary data. So what the

runtime offers is a single Elixir server that can run, uh, you know, you scale it up by memory over time. A single Elixir server that within the Beam VM, which means a... Well, okay, so backing up. Now, why Elixir? Why did we pick Elixir? Not only 'cause it's concurrent, but it's also fault-tolerant. It's known for having nine 9s, uh, meaning it's 90, it works 99.999999999999% of the time, uh, because when something happens or breaks, it does not bring down the entire machine. It only brings down that one node and replaces it with another, um, in case of some incident or some memory failure or some, you know, things happen that we don't, you know, maybe understand all the time or why. Or small bugs. They're limited to only destroying or, or hurting that one node on the Beam. Within the Beam, uh, uh, within each node of the Beam VM, whether I'm serving a web page or running an agent or, you know, um, uh, reading a document, each one of those is a node. So if I'm running an agent on a node in the Beam VM, it is inherently also isolated. It cannot touch any other process

on another node. Every runtime naturally within the Beam VM is completely contained, just like a micro VM that we use today. Now, the differences are the Beam VM is not an operating system. It does not run, uh-You know, Bash. You can't run Bash in, natively in, in Beam. You can't run a Linux kernel in the Beam VM. However, you can run something called Nifs, N-I-F, which is essentially a risky, but, uh, uh, uh, singular risk of running a ... (pause) another language that can still be isolated, but if fails, takes down the entire Elixir server. So if that one thing fails, the entire Elixir server goes down. So you have to be very careful of using NIFs with Elixir because if you pick the wrong one, you know, or you're too liberal with using unsafe async processes, things that, you know, are not fast enough, not memory safe enough, not managed intelligently, you could take down the entire server. So, you have to use it sparingly. So in our case, we only run one NIF,

and that NIF is a global standard for, uh, web assembly based, uh, containerization and isolation written in Rust. Now, Rust is a wonderfully complicated language, but wonderfully implemented because it has something called the BorrowChecker. The BorrowChecker in Rust is essentially the promise that when you build something with safe code, with RustSafeCode, which is just, you know, code that is not running async and is not running, um, you know... I'm probably gonna butcher this, but like, you know, unsafe code has specific standards. Like it, it runs within under a millisecond and it does not run async. And there's certain things that make it unsafe. So, if I ran safe Rust code in a NIF, in Elixir, there would be no chance of me taking down the Beam server, technically. I would be completely safe and the BorrowChecker would promise me that it would work very effectively. The problem is, is we use Rust a lot of times for its unsafe code, because those are some of the things that we need in, in the Beam. So, we have to use very selectively picked unsafe code, which does not mean it's, it's, it's not fault tolerant. It just means that it has the ability to break, uh, and uh, uh,

is not... Uh, I don't know if it has to do with linear memory or not, like linear scale memory, and i- because I don't know if that's true. But, um ... (pause) the Beam VM then relies on this NIF, which runs something called Wasmtime, uh, which is a WebAssembly runtime containerization. It actually runs something called WasmX, which is an Elixir implementation of Wasmtime, um, which is running the Rust NIF, uh, which is run in a Rust, in Rust, in a NIF. So, WasmX runs Wasmtime. Uh, but Wasmtime itself is the only pat dependency that has any ability to break that while still providing the promi- while still providing the promise of isolation. So, because of that, we are able to now run- Hello. Hi, baby. Ooh. Oh. You okay? This allows us to run WebAssembly within the Beam VM. So not only can we already run, you know, um ... (pause) right, it

allows us to run WebAssembly within the Beam VM, so it's isolation within isolation. And don't worry about this. I'll deal with this. Oh, yeah. Of course. Thank you, Kitty. (pauses) WebAssembly, thus completely isolated with scalable memory...Anything we run in WebAssembly, it's completely safe within Wasmtime. Um, and what WebAssembly allows us to do within the runtime is run almost any language that can compile to WebAssembly, which is growing more and more every day. Uh, it can help create apps that are functionally polyglot apps. I can run a Rust app in... Um, if you, if you wanna write in Go in a Linux kernel, you can because it's a computer. It can run any language. You just install whatever has a dependency and it can run it in the operating system. WebAssembly allows us to have that container, but then we have implemented custom compilers written in WebAssembly, so we've essentially taken, um, Clang, um, uh, uh, Rust, um, Go, JavaScript, TypeScript.

We've essentially converted those systems to compile within WebAssembly so that within the VM container that exists, that's generated, it's able to... We're able to essentially compile any of these languages, some more finicky than others, and they'll grow over time. But it allows us to write, you know, most computation of Rust or most of Python and JavaScript and achieve the same level of, um... And be able to, uh, write those languages within a workbook, compiled within a single system, compiled within WebAssembly, making even the very compiler isolated by nature, so that you can containerize thousands of, um, agents from a single Elixir server.

And instead of sending an entire Docker image, you can just send a workbook, which natively carries the packages and systems and everything like a Docker image, can run and install itself on a, um, instance of the, uh, Wasmtime, just like a Docker image would on a Linux kernel. Now, one thing I haven't mentioned yet that I think will throw a lot of people for a loop, but I think it's worth discussing now before we forget, is, there is a kind of pivotal language, um... Well, okay, actually before I even get to that, the third, let's just start with the third prong. The third prong is, uh, now how do I author within the system? I can write a workbook myself, um, I can have my agent write a workbook that could be a Docker image, or it could be a, a container image, it could be an app, it could be a document, it could be a store of documents, it could be anything. And now I have a runtime that can not only run any workbook natively in any langu- in, in, in most languages, uh, ch- generally, the same for e- e- and, and essentially help make those run everywhere. But it can... That same runtime can containerize them at scale within the BeamVM, including agents. And

agents is what this system is really built for, being able to run agents on a single server at in- insanely high concurrency, meaning I can host thousands of agents and users and organizations all isolated from each other so I can easily build a multi-tenant system on a single server. Uh, but...That leaves us with a question of how do I author to this system? How do I write something other than just writing an HTML file? I think a lot of people talk about Markdown, because Markdown is this really effective language for agents, because it's easy to read and people can write it really easily and, uh, you can read it really easily. I think R- Markdown's great for that. It's a great way to put your thoughts down on paper. I think that's what it is. It's, it's written for blogging. It's not meant for coding. It's not meant for anything else. HTML, while extremely valuable and it generates a interface that I would say anyone can read or use, even better than Markdown, uh, it does not solve for the problem of being easy to work with or scalable, uh, to write, read, send to agents. It's very token heavy. Um, it's not great for, um, dynamic runtime processes.

So after a lot of research and playing around with things, the, the whole reason that got me here was something called Org Mode, which is a, um, Emacs-based language inspired by Donald Knuth, who has, is the father of, I don't wanna say many things, but is of, of, of, for myself, one of the people I've learned the most about literate programming, meaning how do we create systems and languages that allow us to write and read, but also allow us to intertwine that context with code? And now, with AI agents, the meaning of literate programming has grown substantially more in the direction of agent, agentic contexts rather than human contexts. Uh, but Org Mode was written on Emacs as originally, from what I understand, like it was like 20 years ago or something, uh, as a way to write notes, um, and to-do lists and like essentially project management programming, while also sort of evolving into a literate programming that allows for polyglot tangling, meaning I can write two blocks of code in different languages in the same file and natively tangle them and untangle

them to my source code. So if I had a section of code I was working on across multiple files, multiple languages, I could write those, those sets of code in source blocks within the context of the notes that I keep, within the context of the project management system I'm maintaining, and that is what Org Mode is at its core. And if you heard that and you said, "Well, shit, I feel like that sounds a lot like what I'm trying to do with Markdown," or at the very least trying to do with HTML or trying to do with a combination of systems and demons running in the background, uh, you know, trying to put the pieces together and you have, you know, uh, all these vectorized databases and things, but like ultimately context and co-locational, um, organization has shown really positive improvement, and I've talked about it, uh, on the agent's ability to understand the concept. If you gave it a single Svelte file, uh, for your app and that Svelte file is doing routing and it has all of its components and everything in a single file and you're gonna look at that and go, "Well, now my context is everything," or, "My context is most of the app," versus componentizing them, putting them in folders that are, that are labeled. But even then, it doesn't showcase or indicate any level of, um, chronology, and that's one of the

things agents struggle with the most is when did something happen? Why did something happen at that point versus today? What is the goal of this thing or that thing? And we end up having these, um, heterogeneous systems that now we have every agent has to have their own, uh, root level package and, uh, every, um, you know, and I have like a million locked files and I'm trying to do a deal with, or work with Bun, but Bun just doesn't work with half the things that I'm trying to use it for. So it leads me to believe that the...Answer is not more heterogeneous behavior. The answer is more homogeneous systems. But at the same time, there's somebody who made a language called Zero, which made zero sense, to me, at least. Uh, the goal was to create a language for agents, and it was just kind of, like ... Um, it didn't, it didn't speak to me any differently, I don't, I don't, and I still don't understand it. I've watched other YouTubers talk about it. I don't think they understand it either. But you could tell people are spinning their wheels on what makes a language effective in this category. When I look at the system, I think ... The one thing that seems to be missing is project management. And that's why Org Mode stuck with me, really well. I, I started learning about how to, how to use it, how to write it, and how to read it. And

the more I looked at people writing and reading it, it made sense that there is a language that not only was effective at writing things like dates and tasks and to-dos and states. It's natively very capable at state management, and serves as a document-based storage system which all of the memory systems are leaning towards. Even Leta, um, AI and similar who are very focused on memory have leaned into context repositories as the answer to agentic memory. Because agents are just really good at reading files, writing to files, editing them. Now, I think there are some caveats that come with Org Mode, like Markdown or any other file-based storage system, is that there's a highly likelihood, a high likelihood of drift. Um, and drift is very common, where if you have an agent writing memories to files, eventually it'll write too many files, or it'll write similar files, and that ends up becoming a problem. And especially with Markdown, which is not a coding language, it's a blogging language, it's really hard to parse and edit Markdown files to understand or programmatically help an agent understand if they have drifted, if they've written something incorrect, if something failed, if there are failure modes to Markdown, please tell me, but I can't write a test suite for Markdown. I can't. I can't, I can't validate Markdown without another agent. But I can't use YAML or something, uh, as most of that requires me building my own parser. Uh, and if I'm gonna do that,

I might as well write my own language, because it doesn't solve for things like dates. It doesn't solve things like source code, like writing code. It doesn't say it sol- solve for, um, uh, uh, natural language prose. If I wanted to write a document, documentation, I can't do that with YAML or TOML or JMEL, or whatever, like, or JSON. You know, they're also very token inefficient, because so much of it is, is, is built into these, um, built for parsing or built for, um, readability, uh, uh, machine, machine readability. So, what Org Mode thrives on is taking the best parts of, um ... Taking the best parts of ... Uh, th- the best parts of Markdown, which are the, um, natural language prose that agents and humans both love. The, uh, uh, native, um, project management systems it was built on to communicate time, tasks, dependencies. Um, it's also highly parsable because some of the, uh, because these things are baked in, it's easy to parse tasks that have certain statuses, times, dates. Um, there is visual hierarchy that

there is a, a, a, an A, there is a hierarchy to the AST. (clicking) So, um, I.It's highly parsable. I can... I can parse a task and a sub-task, both with their dependencies, validations and extend them with new tags, new systems, new types, um, while also being able to write scripts, source code. Uh, they can not only ru- be runnable tools, uh, that you can run source code from an org file, you can tangle that code so that the agent or yourself don't even have to look at the source code. You can just edit and work within the actual file. Now, in today's day and age, I think we're a little bit more worried about the a- agentic ergonomics and the agentic experience.

And those agents seem to, from my experience, prefer an environment that allows them to configure, uh, the actual run times that it creates or the systems it creates around itself. Um, org mode is maybe not the answer completely, but what it does excel at for workbooks is being a configuration language that is highly parsable, highly readable, highly sensible, and is- is also... Has about 20 years of documentation that has made itself into almost every model's training data. They all understand org mode. And you can test it. I've been thinking about doing benchmarks where we go and we ask, um, you know, uh, agents and see how they perform on- on knowing o- org mode from memory. But it also understands a lot of the org mode plug-ins that were built in the ecosystem around it. So it understands things like, um, plug-ins like ROAM or, um, uh... I don't know.

There's a bunch of other ones, but, um, that, unlike something like Zero, is why org mode makes a good language for this. It understands the syntax and the character of org mode. Go ahead. Now, I think I kind of skipped over it and I kind of rambled, but talking about toolkits. That's the third prong of everything. Toolkits are written primarily in org mode, um, because it's such an extensible and, um, polyglot system. It makes sense to instead write your skills in org mode. Um, you can write anything in org mode if you want to, and if they all compile to the same system, which is workbooks, then you have even less reason to refuse the supremacy of org mode. Ooh, there's trash bags. Ah. Now, org mode as a... Uh, or a tool kits are essentially a... Not just org mode, it's a set of org mode files that are shaped much like skills and they're actually usually... I, we've- I've been using them in a skill like tree format, which I don't know if that's gonna stay, but that's what I'm thinking, and that skill tree is the surface layer to

running and maintaining a CLI that the agent can reference. So you could do an MCP. I haven't really thought about it. I've just been focusing on like CLI systems that exist, so that I can package up a CLI system by using a WebAssembly compiler, and I can even do that at run time now since we have our WebAssembly compilers in the run time compiling to WebAssembly from native code. You can now take these CLIs, put them in their, uh, sandboxes in the BEAMVM and wrap them in the same skill structure that you're used to with, uh, agents today, and now you start to see a larger picture of...... what toolkits are able to do. Now, because org-mode is so highly parsable, org-mode can also serve as a API to that CLI. It can serve as a, essentially an interface in which you can call source blocks or, um, scripts, uh, uh, you know, written... You could just write Bash scripts if you want because Bash is now emulated in, uh, WebAssembly. The, um... Toolkit serves as a way to access

as well the runtime SDKs. So I can combine toolkits to create what I ha- just generally call a system or tool system, uh, which includes agents that I can extend out. I can create, uh, workflows which are a way to write org-mode that translates to Kanban-like, Gantt chart-like project management systems. Um, these systems allow for toolkits to not only manage the runtime itself, um, at runtime, but they provide agents, the context and systems that a plug-in would provide. Now there's not necessarily... Yeah. And that's, that's wha- that's essentially what a toolkit is. I think, um, toolkits are probably the most immature of the ecosystem, because they rely on the ability of people to put a path, for people to, if they're interested in this, start converting processes to WebAssembly so that we can start running them in these containers. Not everything translates one-to-one to WebAssembly. JavaScript, for instance, is

runs on QuickJS, and QuickJS does not encapsulate the entirety of JavaScript, but it captures a majority of what needs to be computed for JavaScript-based languages, like Svelte. It helps make it so that the Svelte compiler can run in WebAssembly. Clang, for instance, as well as Zig, have afforded us the opportunity to easily convert those, those build steps to WebAssembly so that the build step happens in WebAssembly, not in native code where there is a risk of running build in native code on an untrusted package, and that's where something breaks. StackBlitz has built their entire laurels on the idea that a StackBlitz web container can essentially run and manage npm packages within the web container, which otherwise can't be done without adding insane risk to untrusted web, uh, code, um, uh, being run in a container. And with AI and everything, that's obviously, as I said, really important. The, uh, crux of this system is in its ability to migrate the

internet, specifically the languages of the internets, the, the languages of s- uh, uh, uh, of computers to WebAssembly so that they can compile within WebAssembly. Then you never have to do any builds outside of the safety of the VVM. Uh, Rust, for instance, has been the most difficult because it comes... because it's such a multifaceted and powerful language, it comes with a lot of caveats, especially when you start breaking out of what is considered safe for us, uh, especially when you start, um, mixing in standard libraries and non-standard libraries, and, uh, so many things that end up being, uh, complicated to create a one-to-one Rust compiler in, um...Web Assembly, one of the things that it does, I had to do, and I think this is something that I would need help on at some point, but I think a- again, immature but- but- but possible, is utilizing the concurrency of the BeamVM to outsource a lot of the async processes like Tokio and Rust, so that when there is need for unsafe code, like an async process, um, you can run it in Web Assembly and leverage the BeamVM to outsource that language. Beam or Elixir and Rust play two imperative roles

in the internet today, but both do not play nice with each other completely. We've- there are people working on projects like Rustler, Wasmtime, Wasmx. These are all systems that have foundationally made them more applicable to each other, but by their very nature, they're very different and solve different problems. But our ability to combine the two will lead to exponential, um, power of Rust level ergonomic parsing and tree walking that it's really good at with the concurrency, like all that compute, it's so good at- at- at running just straight up, um, like linear compute. But Elixir serves as this amazing concurrent infallible core to build off of. Um, for instance, if I wanna run machine learning, I don't really wanna run it in Elixir. There are things like, uh, Bubble Gum or Bumblebee, I forget what it's called, and, um, some other like machine learning packages which I would love to see grow in Elixir, but Rust is really where the- the true computational work is drifting towards, and it's doing it very efficiently in terms of the performance of that computation. Whereas, obviously something like Python or Go are not written for computational efficiency or for their ability to improve the internet as we know it, other than the ergonomics of the internet that w- that we know it, and our ability to functionally

write it and read it and that, for that I thank them. Um, so to make a long story short, toolkits are the extension surface to however you want to use it of the internet. I mean, of Workbooks as an ecosystem. Now, there's one newer folk that really brought the whole system together, and it wasn't till I was working on the Living Landing Page, which is an idea I had to demo the concept of Workbooks and the Workbooks runtime working on a long horizon task. The Workbooks runtime can effectively function with toolkits, with Workbooks, as a, what's called a autopo- poetogenic- autop- autopoegetic system, meaning a self-editing system.

The configurations can be malleable at runtime because they are made with HTML and Web Assembly. The, um, right, for all the reasons I said. I don't need to re-explain that in this- in this like ramble. But the last, um, leg of this system is the Autopoet, which is a, I don't know, pronoun or a, um, name to consider the process of autopoegetic systems or autopoetic systems, meaning self-editing, living systems. Now you could probably spin this many ways, but the reality is if you want to build an autopoe- poeogenic system, you can't really do it in Rust because you have to...You don't really have the same capabilities you do of, um, uh, a... with the build time and the build steps, and i- implementing changes would take forever. Not to mention, the system is not built for that level of, uh, iteration. There's constantly, um, safe, unsafe. One change that is unsafe could take down and break the system. So, you need a lot of safety and security and promises, which something like Elixir does. You can't necessarily run Elixir on its own as this autopoietic system, because it also has a build step, but it also has

limitations of what you can actually do. It's also a young ecosystem. Eventually, I think Elixir could run a lot more from it. But you also want the ability to access libraries and tools and systems like Python and Rust and Go and JavaScript and TypeScript and Svelte and Solid and Astro, which is where Workbooks comes in as the true polyglot combinatorial core that truly brings everything back together. So, the Autopoet is a entity that you can obviously give to an agent or you can, uh, rely on procedural implementation. The Autopoet is a mechanism. It can be run however, you know, however you like within the runtime that is capable of taking the open telemetry standards that, uh, the system uses, the, um, evaluative, um, uh, properties of org being able to manage, um, being able to provide chrono- chronological project management and, uh, semantic context. Um, all these basically just come together to provide a system that gives you everything you need to invent what that Autopoet is. The Autopoet is something like, um, auto research, um,

uh, by Andrej Karpathy is an example of an autopoietic system, self-evolving, self-building, living software, living system. And that's the direction that I think goes beyond agents. Agents are not an ephemeral, uh, serverless function. Agents are not a, um, are not a one-off. Um, uh, uh, agents are not just a, uh, Mac mini in the corner, uh, running ad nauseam. It's not a sole file or a SQLite database or a vector memory database. Agents are a construct of LLMs running on a cron job. I mean, that's all it is. I mean that's, that's that, I mean, that is, uh, the core of what an agent is. It's a chrono- it's a, it's a long-running system. And everything we build on these ends up complicating that. It ends up making it more complicated. Um, the chronology of an agent is I think where we're finally settling. Something like Open Claw or the memory systems we build are built with chronology in mind, therefore they are...

Not, I do have to take you though. I'm gonna take you before it gets dark. A... I think the poly, the Autopoet is a system-level process that is able to edit the runtime and truly make it living, not just in that it has memory and planning, because I think that's where agents have hit their mark. An agent is incapable of planning for itself, prompting itself, managing itself. And ultimately, the only way we can do that is by homogenizing these systems we use-... um, in which it gives us consistent telemetry, consistent results and data. But by (pause for five seconds) also homogenizing the authoring surface, as well as the output, we can truly focus our time on the most important thing, which is consistent improvement of these systems, which will never get better if we can't

parse context, if we can't, um, standardize outputs, if we can't, uh, align around, um, you know, um, frameworks and systems to focus on (pauses for five seconds) what is essentially the (pause for seven seconds) fun part of building agentic systems, which is multi-agent systems, or understanding context, or understanding, um, uh, the way agents work together or work with your customers, or business, business logic, and machine learning that can actually create objective insights, uh, about that data. If we don't build those, we'll just be stuck tooling around... Come on, in, in. Mm. We'll- we'll be stuck tooling around with this framework or that framework for agents in JavaScript, in Go, in Rust, in everything, and ultimately, we'll just get stuck holding the bag. Ah. Ah, no. Back up. Uh, we'll get stuck holding the bag working on tooling and never actually get to the actual progress, which is consistent innovation. We're gonna see a bunch of people selling shovels, but nobody's gonna be actually doing the work that is required for, you know, understanding the landscape and understanding where the actual gold is. I mean, we don't need shovels. We need, we need to focus on the more important things. But we'll just keep looking and

shopping for shovels all day and hope we find something with the prettiest shovel we can find. Ultimately, we wanna stick to what we know. We wanna stick to what is the most accessible for the most amount of people, what is ergonomically the most interesting... No. Ergonomically, the most accessible for both us and agents, as agents are now the new authors. And our trust level will only increase with agents if we can improve the ergonomics by simplifying, standardizing, and implementing a system that is (pause for four seconds) truly not just homogenous, because homogenous is not a, um... Homogeneity is a, is a, um, is a, um, byproduct of, of, I think, good system design. But it requires a level of... Come on. Of understanding that the (pause for eight seconds) tooling is just the beginning. And then I actually think (pause for four seconds) we're just getting to the, um, the fun part, which is not even, uh, context engineering. I think context engineering is also stupid. It's like, how many ways do I have to say this to affect it to get this? And the non-determinism is what makes it like gambling. It's what makes it like,

um, not knowing what's gonna happen, not knowing what the standards are for simple stuff like deployment or, uh, whatever. And I think a huge part of this system is that it's scalable. I can start working on it for- today with my team, with two people, and that same system is scalable to an entire continent, uh, uh, a, a global organization or m- multitenant, uh, software across multiple organizations. It's now capable of managing that because the system is scalable. It's not built on junk. It's not built on Markdown. It's not built on, um, you know, um, Python or something that is just an easy language. It's built, in a way, that scales and delivers everywhere, to anyone. We don't have to worry about operating systems. We don't have to worry about, um... You know, I look at something like Tauri, T-A-U-R-I, and I see a system that was intrinsically built to be, um...... agnostic of platforms. Um, there's another, uh, system, I can't remember what it's called, and she, she built it in C, and it is a, um, app infrastructure that allows you to essentially author an application the exact same way across every operating system. A web assembly has essentially done the same for every browser. Uh, and that's why it, it kind of has its own cargo cult

behavior. It's because, uh, it is highly accessible and it's possible to bring almost any language environment to web assembly if done right and done thoroughly. And obviously, that web assembly is then compiled into Elixir, and then that means we can have concurrent, scalable, efficient run times in an isolated environment on the least amount of hardware possible. Now, I think where the fun part also begins is machine learning. Uh, not LLMs. I think that's, that's trite and, and, and, um, you know, uh, an incomplete vision of what machine learning is. Machine learning is the ability for us to (coughs) look at, um, any kind of data, any kind of binary and pull out patterns correctly. Every business, every person, every system, every thought that goes into our working lives, even our personal lives, those involve some level of machine learning or could use some level of machine learning that can make it better. I mean, uh, understanding my own health takes a level of machine learning that has been trained on data, data that is homogenous. How do you train machine learning models to make agents better if every agentic system is trying to do their own thing?

What if you could create an authoring system that allows every agent system to author homogene- homogenously so that that system functions as a... You know, you, you can have your own flavor, but at the end of the day, the flavor is what brings the insights. The code and tools and systems and tool chains are all noise that, that takes away from our ability to create harnessed models, and that's where I wanna go with this, is I had this idea called Canopy, which was a supervisor layer that would be part of this autopoiet. And it was originally called Canopy, but autopoiet and auto- autopoietic systems are what technically we call them. And the autopoiet is, in my eyes, a machine learning model purely designed on the homogenous system to improve the system at runtime, similarly to how, uh, auto research goes. But auto research only works if the agentic system is strong enough and homogenous enough to... and obviously you have enough training data to actually, um... and, and, and variety and all the things that go into, um, data science. There's a, there's a lot that, that sentence doesn't even do it justice. You need these systems to speak the same language or else the data will be noise. And so my vision for the future of, of this is that the autopoiet is not an LLM that is able to view and observe.

It's something more close to a state space model or a, um, uh, something closer to a, a, uh, like Mamba, Mamba 3. Um, something like a, um, that's able to work with real runtime data, make decisions, or at least inform decisions that can be, uh, diffused into the runtime to change it, alter it at runtime based on what's happening. But you'll never be able to do that with Markdown files.

